#Piezo-Sounder Melody Player
Rather than using the piezo to make annoying alarm sounds, how about using it to play a melody? We are going to get our Arduino to play ‘Oh My Darling Clementine’. Leave the circuit exactly as it was in Piezo Sounder Alarm Project. We are just going to change the code.

####Enter the Code
Open up your Arduino IDE and type in the following code:

```c
#define NOTE_C3  131
#define NOTE_CS3 139
#define NOTE_D3  147
#define NOTE_DS3 156
#define NOTE_E3  165
#define NOTE_F3  175
#define NOTE_FS3 185
#define NOTE_G3  196
#define NOTE_GS3 208
#define NOTE_A3  220
#define NOTE_AS3 233
#define NOTE_B3  247
#define NOTE_C4  262
#define NOTE_CS4 277
#define NOTE_D4  294
#define NOTE_DS4 311
#define NOTE_E4  330
#define NOTE_F4  349
#define NOTE_FS4 370
#define NOTE_G4  392
#define NOTE_GS4 415
#define NOTE_A4  440
#define NOTE_AS4 466
#define NOTE_B4  494

#define WHOLE 1
#define HALF 0.5
#define QUARTER 0.25
#define EIGHTH 0.125
#define SIXTEENTH 0.0625

//NOT TO SELF: UPDATE TO MARIO BROS OR SONIC
int tune[] = {
  NOTE_F3, NOTE_F3, NOTE_F3,  NOTE_C3,
  NOTE_A3, NOTE_A3, NOTE_A3,  NOTE_F3,
  NOTE_F3, NOTE_A3, NOTE_C4,  NOTE_C4,  NOTE_AS3, NOTE_A3, NOTE_G3,
  NOTE_G3, NOTE_A3, NOTE_AS3, NOTE_AS3,
  NOTE_A3, NOTE_G3, NOTE_A3,  NOTE_F3,
  NOTE_F3, NOTE_A3, NOTE_G3,  NOTE_C3,  NOTE_E3,  NOTE_G3, NOTE_F3
};

float duration[] = {
  EIGHTH+SIXTEENTH, SIXTEENTH, QUARTER, QUARTER,
  EIGHTH+SIXTEENTH, SIXTEENTH, QUARTER, QUARTER,
  EIGHTH+SIXTEENTH, SIXTEENTH, QUARTER+EIGHTH, EIGHTH, EIGHTH, EIGHTH, HALF,
  EIGHTH, SIXTEENTH, QUARTER, QUARTER,
  EIGHTH+SIXTEENTH, SIXTEENTH, QUARTER, QUARTER,
  EIGHTH+SIXTEENTH, SIXTEENTH, QUARTER+EIGHTH, EIGHTH, EIGHTH, SIXTEENTH, HALF
};

int length;

void setup() {
        pinMode(8, OUTPUT);
        length = sizeof(tune) / sizeof(tune[0]);
}

void loop() {
        for (int x=0; x<length; x++) {
                tone(8, tune[x]);
                delay(1500 * duration[x]);
                noTone(8);
        }
        delay(5000);
}
```
Once you have uploaded the code, there will be a slight delay and then your piezo will start to play a tune. You may recognize it as ‘Oh My Darling Clementine’. A few new concepts are involved in this project so let’s take a look.

####Code Overview
The first thing you see when looking at the code for Project 12 is the long list of define directives. The define directive is something new to us, but is very simple and very useful, too. `#define` simply defines a token (name) and its value. For example, consider the following:

#define PI 3.14159265358979323846264338327950288419716939937510

This will allow you to substitute PI in any calculation instead of having to type out pi to 50 decimal places.
Here are another few examples

```c
#define TRUE  1  
#define FALSE 0
```

This code means you can put a TRUE or FALSE into your code instead of a 0 or a 1. This makes logical statements a lot clearer for a human to read.

Let’s say that you wrote some code to display shapes on an LED dot-matrix display and the resolution of the display was 8 x 32. You could create define directives for the height and width of the display, thus:

```c
#define DISPLAY_HEIGHT 8
#define DISPLAY_WIDTH 32
```

Now, whenever you refer to the height and width of the display in your code, you can put `DISPLAY_HEIGHT` and `DISPLAY_WIDTH` instead of the numbers 8 and 32.
There are three main advantages to doing this instead of simply using the numbers.

 - First, the code now becomes a lot easier to understand, as you have changed the height and width values of the display into tokens that make these numbers clearer to a third party.
 - Second, if you change your display at a later date to a larger resolution, let’s say, a 16 x 64 display, all you need to do is changed the two values in the `define` directives instead of having to change numbers in what could be hundreds of lines of code in which the display resolution appears. By changing the values in the define directive at the start of the program, the new values are automatically used throughout the rest of the code.
 - Third, with the `#defines`, a third party reading the code no longer needs to know the specifics of the display attached to recognize which portions of the code are dealing with the display width and height. 

In the case of Project 12, we create a whole set of define directives in which the tokens are the notes C3 through to B4 and the values are the frequencies required to create that note. The first note of our melody is F3 and its corresponding frequency is 173 hertz. This is middle F on the musical scale. Not all of the notes defined are used in our melody, but I have included them in case you wish to write your own tune.

The next five define directives are for the note lengths. The notes can be a whole bar in length, or a half, a quarter, an eighth, or a sixteenth of a bar. The numbers are what we will use to multiply the length of the bar in milliseconds to get the length of each note. For example, a quarter note is 0.25 (or one quarter of one), and therefore we multiply then length of the bar, in our case, 1,500 milliseconds, by 0.25 to get the length of a quarter note.

```c
1500 x QUARTER = 375 milliseconds
```

Next we define an integer array called tune[] and fill it with the notes for ‘Oh My Darling Clementine’.

```c
int tune[] = {
  NOTE_F3, NOTE_F3, NOTE_F3,  NOTE_C3,
  NOTE_A3, NOTE_A3, NOTE_A3,  NOTE_F3,
  NOTE_F3, NOTE_A3, NOTE_C4,  NOTE_C4, NOTE_AS3, NOTE_A3, NOTE_G3,
  NOTE_G3, NOTE_A3, NOTE_AS3, NOTE_AS3,
  NOTE_A3, NOTE_G3, NOTE_A3,  NOTE_F3,
  NOTE_F3, NOTE_A3, NOTE_G3,  NOTE_C3, NOTE_E3,  NOTE_G3, NOTE_F3
};
```
After this, we create another array, this time a float, that will hold the duration of the each note as it is played.
```c
float duration[] = {
  EIGHTH+SIXTEENTH, SIXTEENTH, QUARTER, QUARTER,
  EIGHTH+SIXTEENTH, SIXTEENTH, QUARTER, QUARTER,
  EIGHTH+SIXTEENTH, SIXTEENTH, QUARTER+EIGHTH, EIGHTH, EIGHTH, EIGHTH, HALF,
  EIGHTH, SIXTEENTH, QUARTER, QUARTER,
  EIGHTH+SIXTEENTH, SIXTEENTH, QUARTER, QUARTER,
  EIGHTH+SIXTEENTH, SIXTEENTH, QUARTER+EIGHTH, EIGHTH, EIGHTH, SIXTEENTH, HALF
};
```

As you can see by looking at both of these arrays, the use of the define directives to define the notes and the note lengths make reading and understanding the array a lot easier than if it were filled with a series of numbers. We then create an integer called `length`
```c
int length;
```

This will be used to calculate and store the length of the array (i.e., the number of notes in the tune).
In our setup routine, we first set digital pin 8 to an output

```c
pinMode(8, OUTPUT);
```
then initialize the integer length with the number of notes in the array
```c
length = sizeof(tune) / sizeof(tune[0]);
```
and this is done using the sizeof() function.
The `sizeof()` function returns the number of bytes in the parameter passed to it. On the Arduino, an integer is made up of two bytes. A byte is made up of 8 bits. This is delving into the realm of binary arithmetic and, for this project, we do not need to concern ourselves with bits and bytes. We will go into them later in the book.
So, our tune just happens to have 26 notes in it. So the tunes[] array has 26 elements. To calculate that, we get the size (in bytes) of the entire array
```c
sizeof(tune)
```
and divide that by the number of bytes in a single element.
```
sizeof(tune[0])
```
In our case, this is equivalent to
```26 / 2 = 13```

If you replace the tune in the project with one of your own, then length will be calculated as the number of notes in your tune.
The `sizeof()` function is useful in working out the lengths of different data types and is particularly useful if you were to port your code over to another device in which the length of the data types differ from those on the Arduino.
In the main loop, we set up a for loop that iterates the number of times there are notes in the melody.
```c
for (int x=0; x<length; x++) {
```
then play the next note in the tune[] array on pin 8
```c
tone(8, tune[x]);
```
then wait the appropriate amount of time to let the note play
```c
delay(1500 * duration[x]);
```
The delay is 1,500 milliseconds multiplied by the note length (e.g., 0.25 for a quarter note, 0.125 for an eighth note, etc.).
Before the next note is played, we cease the tone generated on pin 8
```c
noTone(8);
```
This is to ensure that when two notes that are the same are played back-to-back, they can be distinguished as individual notes. Without the `noTone()` function, the notes would merge into one long note instead.
Finally, after the for loop is complete, we run a delay of 5 seconds before repeating the melody.
```c
delay(5000);
```
To create the notes for this tune, I used public domain sheet music for ‘Oh My Darling Clementine’ on the internet and typed the notes into the `tune[]` array, followed by the note lengths in the `duration[]` array. Notice I have added note lengths to get dotted notes (e.g. QUARTER+EIGHTH). By doing something similar you can create any tune you want.
If you wish to speed up or slow down the pace of the tune, then change the value of 1,500 in the delay function to something higher or lower.

You can also replace the piezo in the circuit with a speaker or headphones, as long as you put a resistor in series with it to ensure that the maximum current for the speaker is not exceeded, which could damage it.
We are now going to use the piezo disc for another purpose and that is its ability to produce a current when the disc is squeezed or knocked. Utilizing this feature, we are going to make a knock sensor in next project
